## Abstract

**Motivation:** 
Assessing biodiversity status and trends in plant communities is critical for understanding, quantifying and predicting the effects of global change on ecosystems, among other applications. 
Vegetation plots record the occurrence or abundance of all plant species co-occurring (community composition) within delimited local areas.
These data also allow inferring true absences, enabling many analyses not possible using the presence-only data provided by existing global plant datasets. 
Although many vegetation plots have been recorded since the early days of phytosociology, most are not available to the global research community. 
A recent initiative, called sPlot, compiled the first global vegetation plot database, and continues to grow and curate it. 
However, this large dataset is challenging to work with because it is extremely unbalanced spatially and environmentally, but also because the data are not open-access. 
Here, we address both these issues simultaneously by 
(a) resampling the vegetation plots using a novel algorithm and 
(b) securing permission from data holders to openly release data (from 105 local to regional datasets). 
We thus present sPlotOpen, the largest open-access dataset of vegetation plots ever released. 
sPlotOpen can be used to explore global patterns of plant diversity at the community level, as ground truthing data in remote sensing applications or as a baseline for biodiversity monitoring.

**Main types of variable contained:** 
The sPlotOpen database contains 95,104 unique vegetation plots, providing cover or abundance data of naturally co-occurring vascular plant species within delimited areas. From sPlotOpen, three environmentally balanced datasets containing nearly 50,000 vegetation plots each can be extracted and used as replicates for global analyses, albeit not fully independent given some overlap among replicates.
Besides geographic location, date, plot size, biome, elevation, slope, aspect, vegetation type, naturalness, coverage of various vegetation layers and source dataset, plot-level data also include community-weighted mean and variance of 18 plant functional traits from the TRY database.

**Spatial location and grain:** 
All continents except Antarctica, 114 countries, 0.01-40,000 m².

**Time period and grain:** 
From 1888 to 2015, recording dates.

**Major taxa and level of measurement:** 
Vascular plants, 42,677 taxa, plot-level records.

**Software format:** 
Three main matrices (.csv), relationally linked.

## Keywords
Biodiversity, Biogeography, Big-data, Database, Functional traits, Macroecology, Vascular plants, Vegetation plots
