## Database Organization {.page_break_before}

sPlot Open is organized into three main matrices.  

The **'header'** matrix contains plot level information for the 91,031 vegetation plots provided in this open access dataset, including metadata (e.g., plot ID, ownership, sampling date, geographical location, positional accuracy), sampling design information (e.g., the total surface area used during the vegetation survey), and a plot-level description of vegetation structure (e.g., vegetation type, percentage cover of each vegetation layer). For each vegetation plot we further provide information on the dataset it stems from, based on the IDs used in the [Global Index of Vegetation-Plot Databases](http://www.givd.info). 
A brief description of all the xx variables contained in the header matrix is provided in @tbl:Table2.  

The **'DT'** matrix contains data on the species composition of each plot. It is structured in a long format and contains 1,607,826 records, from 39,922 taxa, mostly resolved at the species level. 
For each record we report both the taxon name as originally contributed by the data custodian (column *'Matched_concept'*), and the taxon name after taxonomic standardization (column *'Species_name_harmonized'*). 
For each entry, we report the species cover//abundance values. These follow different standards across the datasets constituting the sPlot database. 
We therefore provide both the cover//abundance value as reported in the oringal data, which often is given on a cover//abundance scale (column *'Cover'*), and a *'Relative_cover'* field, i.e., the cover//abundance of each taxon in each vegetation layer divided by the total cover//abundance of all taxa in that vegetation layer. 
Finally, for each entry, we provide a *'Taxon_group'* field, reporting whether the corresponding taxa is a vascular plant, moss, lichen or alga.  

The **'CWM_CWV'** matrix contains the community-weighted means and variances calculated for each of the 18 functional traits mentioned above. It also contains three additional columns. The column *'Species_richness'* returns the number of species recorded in each plot. The columns *'Trait_coverage_cover'* and *'Trait_coverage_pa'* return respectively the proportion of total cover and species in a plot for which functional trait information was available.  

Functional trait information was available for 20,932 species. 
The average proportion of species in each plot for which we have functional trait information is 0.88 (median = 1). 
For 47,177 plots the coverage is complete, while only in one plot we have no functional trait information for any of the occurring species. 
When considering relative cover, the average trait coverage is 0.89. As many as 68,234 and 74,388 plots have functional trait information for more than 80% of the species or 80% of relative cover, respectively.

sPlot Open contains two additional objects. The **'metadata'** matrix contains plot-level metadata, which allow the used to track the origin of each individual vegetation plot. 
This object contains 15 columns, with information on Plot ID, dataset of origin (column *'GIVD_ID'*), author or surveyor names (columns *'Releve_author'* and *'Releve_coauthor'*), bibliographic references both at the dataset (column *'DB_BIBTEXKEY'*) and plot level (*'Plot_Biblioreference'* and *'BIBTEXKEY'*). 
When available, we also provide information linking the plots to the publication where they appeared (columns *'Nr_table_in_publ'*, *'Nr_releve_in_table'*), to the dataset where they were initially stored (*'Original_nr_in_database'*), or project of origin (*'Project_name'*). 
In case of nested plots (n=1,786), we also provide the original plot and subplot IDs (columns: *'Original_plotID'*, *'Original_subplotID'*). 
The last two columns report plot-level *'Remarks'*, and the unique identifier produced by Turboveg when the vegetation plot was first stored (*'GUID'*). 
Finally, the object **'references'**, contains all the bibliographic references formatted with the BibTex standard. 
Each reference is tagged with a key corresponding to the fields *'DB_BIBTEXKEY'* and *'BIBTEXKEY'* in the metadata. 
We provide an R function (*'sPlotOpen_citation'*)to create reference lists, based on the subset of plots and\\or datasets the user will choose.

With the exception of the 'refernce' file (format .bib), all objects are provided in tab-delimited txt files. All objects, including the 'sPlotOpen_citation' function are also compiled inside an .RData object.
