## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to thousands of vegetation scientists who sampled vegetation plots in the field or digitized them into regional, national or international databases. 
We also appreciate the support of the German Research Foundation for funding sPlot as one of the iDiv (DFG FZT 118, 202548816) research platforms, and the organization of three workshops through the sDiv calls. 
We acknowledge this support with naming the database “sPlot”, where the “s” refers to the sDiv synthesis workshops. 

The study has been supported by the TRY initiative on plant traits (http://www.try-db.org). The TRY initiative and database is hosted, developed and maintained by J. Kattge and G. Bönisch (Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry, Jena, Germany). TRY is currently supported by DIVERSITAS/Future Earth and the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig. 
Jens Kattge acknowledges support by the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry (Jena, Germany), Future Earth, the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig and the EU H2020 project BACI, Grant No 640176.


Isabelle Aubin was funded through Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry.
Yves Bergeron was funded through Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
Idoia Biurrun was funded by the Basque Government (IT936-16).
Anne Bjorkman thank the Herschel Island-Qikiqtaruk Territorial Park management, Catherine Kennedy, Dorothy Cooley, Jill F. Johnstone, Cameron Eckert and Richard Gordon for establishing the ecological monitoring programme. Funding was provided by Herschel Island-Qikiqtaruk Territorial Park.
Luis Cayuela was supported by project BIOCON08_044 funded by Fundación BBVA.
Milan Chytrý, Flavia Landucci, Corrado Marcenò and Tomáš Peterka were supported by the Czech Science Foundation (project no. 19-28491X).
Brian Enquist thanks the following individuals and institutions for contributing data to sPlot via the SALVIAS database: Mauricio Bonifacino, Saara DeWalt, Timothy Killeen, Susan Letcher, Nigel Pitman, Cam Webb, The Missouri Botanical Garden, RAINFOR and the Amazon Forest Inventory Network.
Alvaro G. Gutiérrez acknowledges FONDECYT 11150835, Project FORECOFUN-SSA PIEF-GA-2010–274798), CONICYT-PAI (82130046).
Mohamed Z. Hatim thanks Kamal Shaltout and Joop Schaminée for supervision of the MSc thesis, and Joop Schaminée for support and funding from the Prince Bernard Culture Fund Prize for Nature Conservation.
Jürgen Homeier received funding from BMBF (Federal Ministry of Education and Science of Germany) and the German Research Foundation (DFG Ho3296-2, DFG Ho3296-4).
Tatiana Lysenko was funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No. 16-04-00747a).
Jérôme Munzinger was supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR) with grants INC (ANR-07-BDIV-0008), BIONEOCAL (ANR-07-BDIV-0006) & ULTRABIO (ANR-07-BDIV-0010), by National Geographic Society (Grant 7579-04), and with fundings and authorizations of North and South Provinces of New Caledonia.
Gerhard E. Overbeck acknowledges support from Brazil’s National Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq, grant 310022/2015-0).
Robert Peet acknowledges the support from the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, the North Carolina Ecosystem Enhancement Program, the U.S. Forest Service, and the U.S. National Science Foundation (DBI-9905838, DBI-0213794). 
Josep Peñuelas would like to acknowledge the financial support from the European Research Council Synergy grant ERC-SyG-2013-610028 IMBALANCE-P
Oliver Phillips was funded by an ERC Advanced Grant (291585, “T-FORCES”) and a Royal Society-Wolfson Research Merit Award.
Valério D. Pillar has been supported by the Brazil’s National Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq, grant 307689/2014-0).
Solvita Rūsiņa was supported by the University of Latvia grant AAP2016/B041//Zd2016/AZ03 within the “Climate change and sustainable use of natural resources”.
Franziska Schrodt was supported by a University of Minnesota Institute on the Environment Discovery Grant, a German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig grant (50170649_#7) and a University of Nottingham Anne McLaren Fellowship.
Jens Christian Svenning considers this work a contribution to his VILLUM Investigator project “Biodiversity Dynamics in a Changing World” funded by VILLUM FONDEN (grant 16549).
Kim André Vanselow would like to thank W. Bernhard Dickoré for the help in the identification of plant species and acknowledge the financial support from the Volkswagen Foundation (AZ I/81 976) and the German Research Foundation (DFG VA 749/1-1, DFG VA 749/4-1).
Evan Weiher was funded by NSF DEB-0415383, UWEC-ORSP, and UWEC-BCDT. Jiri Dolezal would like to acknowledge the financial support from MSMT-INTER-EXCELLENCE project (LTAUSA18007).

This paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Ching-Feng (Woody) Li.

## Author contributions
FMS wrote the first draft of the manuscript, with considerable input from JL and HB. JL and TH wrote the resampling algorithm. FMS set up the GitHub projects, curated the database, and produced the graphs. He also coordinated the sPlot consortium. SMH wrote the Turboveg v3 software, which holds the sPlot database. JK provided the trait data from TRY and FS performed the trait data gap filling. HB secured the funding for sPlot as a strategic project of iDiv. All other authors contributed data. All authors contributed to revising the manuscript.
 
## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
