## Background & Summary {.page_break_before}


Biodiversity is facing a global crisis. 
As many as 1 million species are currently threatened with extinction, the vast majority due to anthropogenic impacts such as land-use and climate change (@ipbes2019, @isbn:9782940529902). 
In addition, the rates of biodiversity homogenization and redistribution are accelerating (@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2640-y, @doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1198-2; @doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1176-8). 
Biological assemblages are becoming progressively more similar to each other globally, as local and endemic species go extinct and are replaced by more widespread and competitive native or alien species (@ipbes2019; @doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1176-8). 
Many terrestrial and marine species are also shifting their geographical distribution as a response to climate change (@doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1198-2), including animals hosting pathogens transmissible to humans (@doi:10.1038/nature06536; @doi:10.1126/science.1244325). 
This has profound potential impacts on ecosystems and human health (@doi:10.1126/science.aai9214;  @doi:10.1111/brv.12344). 


Plant communities are no exception to this biodiversity crisis (@doi:10.1126/science.1156831; @doi:10.3732/ajb.1000364; @doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1176-8). 
This is particularly worrying since terrestrial vegetation accounts for 80% (450 Gt C) of the living biomass on Earth (@doi:10.1073/pnas.1711842115). 
Given the central role of vegetation in ecosystem productivity, structure, stability and functioning (@doi:10.3732/ajb.1000364), assessing biodiversity status and trends in plant communities is paramount for other kingdoms of life and human societies alike.  

Monitoring trends in plant biodiversity requires adequate data across a range of spatiotemporal scales (@doi:10.1016/j.oneear.2020.09.010, @doi:10.1002/ppp3.10160). 
Large independent collections of plant occurrence data do exist at the global or continental extent via the Botanical Information and Ecology Network (BIEN) (@doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.2615v2), the Global Inventory of Floras and Traits (GIFT) (@doi:10.1111/jbi.13623) or the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) (https://www.gbif.org/). 
However, these databases are either imbalanced towards tree species only, or neglect how individual plant species co-occur and interact locally to form plant communities, or are collected at spatial resolutions which preclude intersection with high resolution remote sensing data and are too coarse (e.g., one‐degree grid cells) to assess biodiversity trends at the plant community scale (@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000385).  

Yet, there is a long tradition among botanists to record the cover or abundance of each plant species that occurs in a vegetation plot location of a given size (i.e. surface area) at a given time (e.g. @Stebler1893). 
Compared to presence-only data, vegetation-plot data (termed 'presence-absence' here) present many advantages. 
As all visible plant species are recorded, plots contain information on which plant species do, and do not, co‐occur in the same locality at a given moment in time (@doi:10.1111/avsc.12191). 
This is important for testing hypotheses related to biotic interactions among plant species. 
Vegetation-plot data also provide crucial information on where and when a species was absent, therefore improving predictions from current species distribution models (@doi:10.1890/07-2153.1). 
Being spatially explicit, vegetation plots can be resurveyed through time to assess potential changes in plant species composition relative to a baseline (@doi:10.1111/gcb.14030; @doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0005-6, @doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1176-8). 
As they normally contain information on the relative cover or abundance of each species, vegetation plots are also more appropriate for detecting biodiversity changes than data representing only the occurrence of individual species (@doi:10.1111/j.1654-1103.2011.01318.x, @doi:10.1111/oik.05114).  

Globally, however, vegetation-plot data are very fragmented, as they typically stem from a myriad of local research and survey projects (@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710). 
Consequently, these data often have high fine-grain spatial resolutions but small spatial extents (@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3000183). 
Furthermore, with their disparate sampling protocols, standards and taxonomic resolutions, aggregating and harmonizing vegetation plot data proves extremely challenging (@doi:10.1038/s41559-018-0699-8). 
It is not surprising, therefore, that these data are rarely used in global‐scale research on the biodiversity of plant communities (@doi:10.1111/geb.12501; @doi:10.1111/jvs.12419; @doi:10.1111/jvs.12864).  

The sPlot initiative tries to close this data gap. 
It consolidates numerous local to regional vegetation-plot datasets to create a harmonized and comprehensive global database of georeferenced terrestrial plant species assemblages (@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710). 
Established in 2013, sPlot (version 3) currently contains more than 1.9 million vegetation plots, and is fully integrated with the TRY database (@https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14904), from which it derives information on plant functional traits. 
The sPlot database is increasingly being used to study continental-to-global scale vegetation patterns, such as the relative contribution of regional vs. local factors on the global patterns of fern richness (@doi:10.1111/jbi.13782), the mechanisms underlying the spread and abundance of native vs. invasive tree species (@doi:10.1111/geb.13027), and worldwide trait–environment relationships in plant communities (@doi:10.1038/s41559-018-0699-8).  


Yet, most of these data are not open-access. 
Here, we secured permission from data holders in the sPlot database to openly release a dataset composed of 95,104 vegetation plots. 
We selected the plots to release using a replicated environmental stratification, in order to represent the entire environmental space covered by the sPlot database. 
This maximises the benefits of this large dataset for a wide range of potential uses.
The selected vegetation plots stem from 105 databases and span 114 countries (Figure {@fig:Figure1}). 
This resampled dataset (sPlotOpen - hereafter) is composed of: 
(1) plot-level information, including metadata and basic vegetation structure descriptors; 
(2) the vascular plant species composition of each vegetation plot, including species cover or abundance information when available; and 
(3) community-level functional information obtained by intersection with the TRY database (@https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14904).  

![Top: Global distribution of all vegetation plots contained in sPlotOpen (n = 95,104). Each color represents a different source dataset (n = 105 - different datasets might have the same color). Bottom: Spatial distribution of vegetation plot density in the first resampling iteration (n = 49,787). Densities are calculated in hexagonal cells with a spatial resolution of approximately 70,000 km². Map projection is Eckert IV.](images/figure1.png){#fig:Figure1}
