## Methods {.page_break_before}

### Vegetation plot data sources
We started from the sPlot database v2.1 (created in October 2016), which contains 1,121,244 unique vegetation plots and 23,586,216 species records.
Most of the data in sPlot refers to natural and semi-natural vegetation, while vegetation shaped by intensive and repeated human interference, such as cropland or ruderal communities, is hardly represented.
Data originate from 110 different vegetation‐plot datasets of regional, national or continental extent, some of which stemming from regional or continental initiatives (see @doi:10.1111/jvs.12710 for more information). 
For instance: 48 vegetation-plot datasets derive from the European Vegetation Archive (EVA) (@doi:10.1111/avsc.12191); three major African datasets derive from the Tropical African Vegetation Archive (TAVA); and multiple vegetation datasets in the USA and Australia derive from the VegBank (@PeetLeeBoyle2012; @Peet2012) and TERN's AEKOS  (@isbn:9781315368252) archives, respectively. 
Data from other continents (South America, Asia) or countries were contributed as separate standalone datasets. 
The metadata of each individual vegetation-plot dataset stored in sPlot are managed through the Global Index of Vegetation‐Plot Databases [GIVD](http://www.givd.info) (@doi:10.1111/j.1654-1103.2011.01265.x), using the GIVD code as the unique dataset identifier.

### Resampling method
Data in the sPlot database are unevenly distributed across vegetation types and geographic regions (see @doi:10.1038/s41559-018-0699-8). 
Mid-latitude regions in developed countries (mostly Europe, the USA and Australia) are overrepresented in sPlot, while regions in the tropics and subtropics are underrepresented, which is a typical geographical bias in biodiversity data (e.g., @doi:10.1111/ecog.00967; @doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1198-2). 
To reduce this imbalance as much as possible, we performed a stratified resampling approach, using several environmental variables available at global extent as sampling strata. 

First, we removed vegetation plots without geographical coordinates or with a location uncertainty higher than 3 km. 
We also removed vegetation plots identified by the respective data contributors as having been recorded in wetlands or in anthropogenic vegetation types, since these data were available only for few geographic regions, mostly in Europe. 
This resulted in a total of 799,400 out of the initial set of 1,121,244 vegetation plots. 

We then ran a global principal component analysis (PCA) on a matrix of all terrestrial grid cells at a spatial resolution of 2.5 arcmin (n = 8,384,404), based on 30 climatic and soil variables. 
For climate, we used the 19 bioclimatic variables from CHELSA v1.2 (@doi:10.1038/sdata.2017.122), as well as two other bioclimatic variables reflecting the growing-season length (growing degree days above 1 °C - GDD1 - and 5 °C - GDD5), which were derived from CHELSA's monthly average temperatures. 
Specifically, we summed the number of days of those months with average temperature greater than 1 °C or 5 °C, respectively. 
In addition, we considered an index of aridity and a layer for potential evapotranspiration from the Consortium of Spatial Information (CGIAR-CSI @https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.7707605.v3). 
For soil, we extracted seven variables from the SoilGrids database (@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0169748), namely: (1) soil organic carbon content in the fine earth fraction; (2) cation exchange capacity; (3) pH; as well as the fractions of (4) coarse fragments; (5) sand; (6) silt; and (7) clay.  
The results of this PCA represents the full environmental space of all terrestrial habitats on Earth, irrespective of whether a grid cell hosted vegetation plots or not (Figure {@fig:supplement}). 
We then subdivided the PCA ordination space, represented by the first two principal components (PC1–PC2), which accounted for 47% and 23% of the total environmental variation in terrestrial grid cells, into a regular 100 × 100 grid. 
This PC1-PC2 two-dimensional space was subsequently used to balance our sampling effort across all PC1-PC2 grid cells for which vegetation plots were available.
After excluding 42,878 vegetation plots for which no PC1 or PC2 values were available, due to missing data in the bioclimatic or soil variables, we projected the remaining 
756,522 vegetation plots onto this PC1-PC2 grid.
We finally calculated how many vegetation plots occurred in each PC1-PC2 grid cell (Figure {@fig:Figure2}). 

In total, vegetation plots were available for 1,720 out of the 4,125 PC1-PC2 grid cells covered by the 8,384,404 terrestrial grid cells of the geographical space.
We then resampled those PC1-PC2 grid cells (n = 858) with more than 50 vegetation plots, which is the median number of plots occurring across occupied grid cells in sPlot. 
This threshold of 50 vegetation plots represents a compromise between selecting a high number of plots, and keeping the resampled dataset as much balanced as possible across the PC1-PC2 environmental space. 
To select these 50 vegetation plots we used the heterogeneity-constrained random resampling algorithm from Lengyel et al. (2011) \[@doi:10.1111/j.1654-1103.2010.01225.x\]. 
This approach optimizes the selection of a subset of vegetation plots that encompasses the highest variability in species composition while avoiding peculiar and rare communities, which may represent outliers. 
As such, our approach maximizes variability over representativeness when resampling vegetation plots. 
We quantified the variability in plant species composition among the 50 randomly selected vegetation plots by computing the mean and the variance of the Jaccard’s dissimilarity index (@doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.1912.tb05611.x) between all possible pairs of these 50 vegetation plots (n = 1,225). 
More precisely, for a given PC1-PC2 grid cell containing more than 50 vegetation plots, we generated 1,000 random selections of 50 vegetation plots and ranked each selection according to the mean (ascending order) and variance (descending order) value of the Jaccard's dissimilarity index. 
Ranks from both sortings were summed for each random selection, and the selection with the lowest summed rank was considered to provide the most balanced/even representation of vegetation types within the focal grid cell. 
Where a grid cell contained less than 50 plots, we retained all of them. 
In this way, we reduced the imbalance towards over-sampled climate types while ensuring that the resampled dataset represents the entire environmental gradient covered by the original sPlot database.
We repeated the whole resampling procedure three times to get three different environmentally-balanced, resampled subsets of our vegetation plots. 
These three resampling iterations can therefore be used as separate replicates, albeit these are not completely independent, as the same plots might have been drawn in different iterations. In addition, those plots located in PC1-PC2 grid cells with less than 50 vegetation plots are completely shared by all three iterations.

![Distribution of vegetation plots from sPlotOpen in the global environmental space based on a principal component analysis (PCA) using 30 climate and soil variables. Top: Spatial distribution of PCA values across all terrestrial grid cells (n = 8,384,404, spatial grain = 2.5 arcmin). Bottom Left: Distribution of plots compared to the distribution of all terrestrial 2.5 arc‐minute cells (gray background) in the PCA space. Only the plots in the environmentally-balanced dataset selected by the first resampling iteration are shown (n = 49,787). The PCA space was divided into a 100 × 100 regular grid. The first and second PCA axis explained 47% and 23% of the total variance. Bottom right: Geographic distribution of the vegetation plots contained in four randomly selected grid cells.](images/figure2.png){#fig:Figure2}

### Permission to release the data as open access
The resampling procedure resulted in 56,486, 56,501 and 56,494 vegetation plots selected during resampling iteration #1, #2 and #3, respectively, for a total 107,238 unique vegetation plots.
Since the sPlot database is a consortium of independent datasets whose copyright belongs to the data contributor, we used this preliminary potential selection to ask each dataset’s custodian (i.e., either the owner of a dataset or its authorized representative in case of a collective dataset) for permission to release the data of selected vegetation plots as open access. 
For 12,134 unique vegetation plots, permission could not be granted because, for instance, the data are unpublished, confidential or sensitive. 
The number of vegetation plots for which the open-access permission was not granted in resampling iteration #1, #2 and #3 were 6,699, 6,690 and 6,705, respectively.

To mitigate the imbalance due to the exclusion of these confidential plots, we created a 'consensus' dataset. 
We started from resampling iteration #1, and replaced the 6,699 plots not granted as open access, with plots selected in the second and third iteration, for which such permission could be granted ('reserve' plots, hereafter).
We imposed the constraint that each candidate vegetation plot in the reserve pool should belong to the same environmental stratum, i.e., the same PC1-PC2 grid cell, of the confidential vegetation plot, even if we acknowledge that this procedure does not maximize the variability in plant species composition of the replacement plots.
Even after drawing from reserves, there were 3,150 plots that could not be replaced. 
These were distributed across 279 PC1-PC2 grid cells (16.2% of occupied cells), each cell having on average 11 irreplaceable plots (min = 1, median = 5, max = 50).

### Trait information
For each vegetation plot for which open access could be granted, we computed the community-weighted mean and variance for eighteen plant functional traits derived from the TRY database v3.0 (@https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14904). 
These traits were selected among those that describe the leaf, wood and seed economics spectra (@https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1004327224729; @doi:10.1111/1365-2745.12211), and are known to either affect different key ecosystem processes or respond to macroclimatic drivers, or both (@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710). 
The eighteen plant functional traits (all concentrations based on dry weight) were: (1) leaf area \[mm^2^\]; (2) stem specific density \[g cm^-3^\]; (3) specific leaf area \[m^2^kg^-1^\]; (4) leaf carbon concentration \[mg g^-1^\]; (5) leaf nitrogen concentration \[mg g^-1^\]; (6) leaf phosphorus concentration \[mg g^-1^\]; (7) plant height \[m\]; (8) seed mass \[mg\]; (9) seed length \[mm\]; (10) leaf dry matter content \[g g^-1^\]; (11) leaf nitrogen per area \[g m^-2^\]; (12) leaf N:P ratio \[g g^-1^\]; (13) leaf 𝛿^15^N \[per million\]; (14) seed number per reproductive unit; (15) leaf fresh mass \[g\]; (16) stem conduit density \[mm^-2^\]; (17) dispersal unit length \[mm\]; and (18) conduit element length \[μm\].  

Because missing values were particularly widespread in the species-trait matrix, we calculated community-weighted means using the gap-filled version of these traits we received from TRY (@https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14904).
Gap-filling was performed at the level of individual observations and relies on a hierarchical Bayesian modeling (R package ‘BHPMF’, @doi:10.1109/ICMLA.2014.56; @doi:10.1111/geb.12335). 
This is a Bayesian machine learning approach, with no a priori assumptions, except for the data being missing completely at random. 
The algorithm "learns" from the data, i.e. if there was a phylogenetic signal in the data, this was used to fill the gaps but where no such signal was apparent, none was introduced.
After gap-filling, we transformed to the natural logarithm all gap‐filled trait values and averaged each trait by taxon (i.e., at species, or genus level). 
The gap-filling approach was run only for species having at least one trait observation (n = 21,854). 
Additional information on the gap-filling procedure is available in \[@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710\].  

Community‐weighted means (CWM) and variances (CWV) were calculated for every plant functional trait *j* and every vegetation plot *k* as follows (@doi:10.1016/bs.aecr.2015.02.001):  
 
$$ CWM_{j,k} = \sum_{i}^{n_k} p_{i,k} t_{i,j}$$ {#eq:Equation1}  
$$ CWV_{j,k} = \sum_{i}^{n_k} p_{i,k} (t_{i,j} - CWM_{j,k})^2$$ {#eq:Equation2}  

where *n~k~* is the number of species with trait information in vegetation plot *k*, *p~i,k~* is the relative abundance of species *i* in vegetation plot *k* calculated as the species’ fraction in cover or abundance of total cover or abundance, and *t~i,j~* is the mean value of species *i* for trait *j*. 
