## Data Records {.page_break_before}

sPlotOpen contains 95,104 unique vegetation plots from 105 constitutive datasets (Table @tbl:Table1) and from 114 countries covering all continents except Antarctica (Figure {@fig:Figure1}).
This set of 95,104 vegetation plots is the result of pooling together the three environmentally-balanced datasets from resampling iterations #1, #2 and #3 containing 49,787, 49,811 and 49,789 plots, respectively, after excluding the set of plots not granted as open access by data contributors. 
The number of plots shared across all three resampling iterations is 19,672, while 14,939 plots are shared between two iterations.
Replacing confidential plots in resampling iteration #1 with reserves from the other two iterations in the same PC1-PC2 grid cell, resulted in a consensus version containing 53,262 plots.
sPlotOpen only contains the species composition of vascular plants; information on the composition of bryophytes and lichens was discarded since it was only available for a minority of plots (n = 11,001 and n = 6,801, respectively).
Information on the size (surface area) of the vegetation survey is available for 66,461 plots, and ranges between 0.03 and 40,000 m^2^ (mean = 377 m^2^; median = 100 m^2^). 
Specifically, sPlotOpen contains 12,894 plots with size smaller than 10 m^2^, 25,742 with size 10-100 m^2^, 24,750 plots with size 100-1,000 m^2^ and 3,075 plots with size greater or equal to 1,000 m^2^.
Similarly, only for a minority of plots (n = 24,167) information on the exact group of plants sampled in the field is available (e.g., complete vegetation, only trees, only trees > 1 m height, and so on). 
However, as most data were collected using the phytosociological method, we deem safe to assume that, unless otherwise specified, plots contain information on all vascular plants.
We retained plots with incomplete vegetation, because they were mostly located in the tropics, i.e., in areas where vegetation plots are particularly scarce otherwise.
The average number of vascular plant species per vegetation plot ranges between 1 (i.e. monospecific stands) and 271 species (mean = 20; median = 16).

By capping the number of vegetation plots in overrepresented environmental conditions, the resampling procedure described above strongly reduced the bias in the distribution of vegetation plots within the PC1-PC2 environmental space. 
Yet, due to the lack or scarcity of data from some geographical regions, like the tropics, there is some remaining imbalance in the spatial distribution of vegetation plots  across geographical regions (Figure {@fig:Figure1}). 
This is evident when comparing the number of plots across continents or biomes. 
When considering the first resampling iteration only (n = 49,787), Europe is by far the best represented continent, with 15,920 vegetation plots. 
The least represented continents are Africa and South America, with 3,709 and 5,498 vegetation plots, respectively. 
This imbalance is even lower when considering biomes.
With the exception of the 'Temperate mid-latitudes' biome, which includes 14,100 vegetation plots, all other biomes have a number of plots comprised between 1,558 ('Polar and subpolar zone') and 6,245 ('Subtropics with year-round rain') vegetation plots (Figure {@fig:Figure3}, left). 
Despite this residual imbalance, all the Whittaker biomes are covered by sPlotOpen (Figure {@fig:Figure3}, right), and our resampling algorithm has resulted in a much more balanced dataset than many other global datasets that are available, such as GBIF. 


![Distribution of vegetation plots in the first resampling iteration of sPlotOpen (n = 49,787) in the two-dimensional climatic space represented by mean annual temperature and mean annual precipitation. Left: plots are color coded based on sBiomes, i.e., sPlot's definition of biomes (@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710), which derives from Schultz (2005)(@doi:10.1007/3-540-28527-x) ecozones, modified to include also the alpine biome from Körner et al. (2017)(@doi:10.1007/s00035-016-0182-6). Right: the same plots superimposed onto Whittaker (1975) biomes (@Whittaker1975), as adapted by Rickleff (2008)(@isbn:9780716786979) and plotted using the *R* package *plotbiomes*.](images/figure3.png){#fig:Figure3}

Almost one third of the 95,104 vegetation plots in sPlotOpen belong to forests (n = 38,282), one half to non-forest vegetation (n = 45,735), with 11.6 % of plots remaining unassigned (n = 11,087). 
When not directly done by data providers, the assignment of plots to forests and non-forests was based on multiple lines of evidence, including the plot-level information on the cover of the tree layer, as well as traits of species composing a plot, such as growth form and height. 
In short, a plot record was considered as forest if the cover of the tree layer, or alternatively, the sum of the (relative) cover of all tree taxa (scaled by the sum of all cover values, in percentage), was greater than 25%. It was considered a non-forest record if the sum of relative cover of low‐stature, non‐tree and non‐shrub taxa was greater than 90%. 
For an extensive explanation of this classification scheme, we refer the reader to Bruelheide et al. (2019) \[@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710\]. 
Even if the proportion of forest vs. non-forest vegetation plots is relatively well-balanced, the geographical distribution of vegetation plots belonging to different vegetation types is likely not balanced in the geographical space, as it depends on the idiosyncrasies of the constitutive datasets composing the sPlot database. 
For instance, the data from New Zealand only include plots collected in non-forest ecosystems, while data from Chile only refer to forests. 
We urge potential users to carefully read the description of each individual dataset in [GIVD](http://www.givd.info) and to contact the custodians of each dataset for further information.
