## Database Organization {.page_break_before}

sPlotOpen is organized into three main matrices, relationally linked through the key column *'PlotObservationID'*.

The **'header'** matrix contains plot-level information for the 95,104 vegetation plots, including: metadata (e.g., plot ID, ownership, sampling date, geographical location, positional accuracy); sampling design information (e.g., the total surface area used during the vegetation survey); and a plot-level description of vegetation structure (e.g., vegetation type, percentage cover of each vegetation layer), vegetation type, and naturalness level (i.e., whether a plot  belongs to the same formation that would occupy the site without human interference). 
Plots in Europe are also classified according to the EUNIS habitat classification (column *'ESY'*), based on the habitat classification expert system described in Chytrý et al. (2020) [@doi:10.1111/avsc.12519]. 
For each vegetation plot, we further provide information on the dataset it originates from, based on the IDs used in [GIVD](http://www.givd.info). 
We also report four binary fields describing whether a plot belongs to the three resampling iterations (columns *'Resample_1'*, *'Resample_2'*, *'Resample_3'*), or to the first resampling iteration after the inclusion of replacement plots (column *'Resample_1_consensus'*).
A brief summary of all the 47 variables in the header matrix is provided in Table @tbl:Table2.  

The **'DT'** matrix contains data on the species composition of each plot. 
It is structured in a long format and contains 1,945,384 records from 42,680 vascular plant taxa, mostly resolved at the species level. 
For each record, we report both the taxon name as originally contributed by the data custodian (column *'Original_species'*), and the taxon name after taxonomic standardization (column *'Species'*), together with its cover/abundance values. 
These follow different standards across the datasets constituting the sPlot database. 
We, therefore, provide both the cover/abundance value as reported in the original data (column *'Original_abundance'*), together with the abundance scale that was originally used (column *'Abundance_scale'*). 
This can take seven values: 'CoverPerc' = percentage cover; 'pa' = presence-absence; 'x_BA' = basal area (m^2^/ha, only for woody species); 'x_IC' = individual count, i.e., number of individuals in plot; 'x_SC' = stem count, i.e., number of stems in plot; 'x_IV' = importance value index; 'x_PF' = presence frequency. 
The great majority of entries, however, use the percentage cover scale (n= 1,709,000). 
Finally, for each entry, we calculated a *'Relative_cover'*, i.e., the cover/abundance of a given taxon divided by the total cover/abundance of all taxa in that vegetation plot.  

The **'CWM_CWV'** matrix contains the community-weighted means and variances calculated for each of the 18 functional traits mentioned above. 
It also contains three additional columns. 
The column *'Species_richness'* returns the number of species recorded in each plot. 
The columns *'Trait_coverage_cover'* and *'Trait_coverage_pa'* return, respectively, the proportion of total cover and species in a plot for which functional trait information was available. 
Functional trait information was available for 21,854 species. 
The average proportion of species in each plot for which we have functional trait information is 0.85 (median = 0.95). 
For 42,012 plots, the coverage is complete, while we do not have functional trait information for any of the species occurring in 482 plots. 
When considering relative cover, the average trait coverage is 0.87. 
As many as 68,041 and 74,151 plots have functional trait information for 80% or more of the species or relative cover, respectively.

sPlotOpen contains two additional objects. The **'metadata'** matrix contains plot-level metadata, which provide information on the origin of each individual vegetation plot. 
This object contains 15 columns, with information on the dataset of origin (column *'GIVD_ID'* - @doi:10.1111/j.1654-1103.2011.01265.x), author or surveyor names (columns *'Releve_author'* and *'Releve_coauthor'*), bibliographic references both at the dataset (column *'DB_BIBTEXKEY'*) and plot level (*'Plot_Biblioreference'* and *'BIBTEXKEY'*), when available. 
Similarly, the column *'Project_name'* provides information on the project in which a vegetation plot was collected.
When available, we also provide information on the numbering of the plots in the publication where they originally appeared (columns *'Nr_table_in_publ'*, *'Nr_releve_in_table'*), or in the dataset where they were initially stored (*'Original_nr_in_database'*). 
In the case of nested plots (n = 1,851), we also provide the original plot and subplot IDs (columns: *'Original_plotID'*, *'Original_subplotID'*). 
The last two columns report plot-level *'Remarks'*, and the unique identifier produced by Turboveg when the vegetation plot was first stored (*'GUID'*). 


Finally, the object **'references'**, contains all the bibliographic references formatted according to a BibTex standard. 
Each reference is tagged with a key corresponding to the fields *'DB_BIBTEXKEY'* and *'BIBTEXKEY'* in the metadata. 
We further provide an R function (*'sPlotOpen_citation'*) to create reference lists, based on a selection of plots and/or datasets.

Except for the 'reference' file (format .bib), all objects/matrices are provided in tab-delimited .txt files. 
All objects, including the *'sPlotOpen_citation'* function, are also compiled inside an .RData object.
