## Technical Validation {.page_break_before}

The original sPlot database has a nested structure and consists of several individual datasets, each validated and maintained by its respective dataset custodian. 
In many cases, individual datasets are also collections whose vegetation plots were provided by their respective owners (the person who performed the actual vegetation survey) or by someone who digitized the original data from the scientific published or grey literature. 
We obviously have no direct control over the individual vegetation plots that we provide here in sPlotOpen. 
Yet, all these vegetation plots stem from trained professional botanists, or published scientific work, and are accompanied by detailed information on the sampling protocols used, thus ensuring data quality and reliability.  

Before integration into the sPlot database, each dataset was further checked for consistency. 
If the dataset was in a different format, we converted it to a Turboveg 2 dataset (@doi:10.2307/3237010). 
Turboveg is a program specifically designed for the storage, selection and export of vegetation plots (https://www.synbiosys.alterra.nl/turboveg/). 
During this conversion, we checked that all datasets contained the required metadata information, and cross-checked that each plot was located within the geographic scopes of its respective dataset. 
All individual Turboveg 2 datasets were then integrated into a Turboveg 3 database, and exported to comma-separated files.
Finally, we harmonized all the taxonomic names from all datasets, based on the sPlot’s taxonomic backbone (@doi:10.5281/zenodo.845445). 
This backbone matched all the taxonomic names (without nomenclatural authors) from all datasets in sPlot 2.1 and TRY v3.0 (@https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14904) to their resolved version based on the Taxonomic Name Resolution Service web application (TNRS version 4.0; @doi:10.1186/1471-2105-14-16). 
This allowed us to (1) harmonize all datasets to a common nomenclature, and (2) link the sPlot database to the TRY database (@https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14904). 
The final backbone only retained matched taxonomic names at the rank of species or higher. 
Additional detail on the taxonomic resolution is reported in \[@doi:10.1111/jvs.12710\], while a description of the workflow, including R‐code, is available in \[@doi:10.5281/zenodo.845445\].

## Usage Notes

The sPlotOpen database can be downloaded from https://idata.idiv.de/ddm/Data/ShowData/3474. 
Users are urged to cite the original sources when using sPlotOpen in addition to the present paper, particularly when using data contained in BioTIME (@https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12729). 
For two datasets (AF-00-009, AF-CD-001), the identification of taxa at species level is still in progress. 
Data on lichens and mosses, where available (e.g., dataset NA-GL-001), can be obtained on request from the respective dataset custodian or sPlot coordinator. 
As most of the constitutive datasets remain under continuous development, sPlotOpen users are encouraged to get in touch with the custodian(s) of the data they are planning to use (custodian names are reported in https://www.idiv.de/en/splot). 

The use of sPlotOpen comes with a number of warnings.
First, sPlotOpen was resampled in a way that maximizes the compositional variability of vegetation in different environmental conditions.
As such, sPlotOpen should not be considered as representative of the distribution of plant communities worldwide. 
Second, for most regions data was collected opportunistically, and without a randomized sampling design. 
This might lead to some vegetation types being oversampled in some regions, but undersampled in other regions, which might affect the output of species distribution models, especially at local or regional spatial extents.
Third, not all plots were sampled using the same plot size, which should be accounted for when comparing biodiversity indices (e.g., species richness, beta-diversity) across plots or regions.
Fourth, not all plots contain complete information on all plant species. 
A limited number of plots, mostly located in tropical regions, only contain data on woody species. 
This should be kept in mind when exploring biodiversity patterns. 
Finally, a small fraction of plots represent nested subsets of larger plots. 
Depending on the application, this might or might not represent a problem. 
Nested plots can be identified using the information in the **'metadata'** matrix. 
The most appropriate way to deal with these problems depends on the problem being analyzed. 
Users are therefore invited to carefully consider the limitations above when designing applications relying on sPlotOpen.

The data included in the present paper represent the subset of sPlot for which we were able to secure permission for making these data open. 
The additional data in sPlot are available under sPlot's Governance and Data Property Rules (https://www.idiv.de/en/splot). 
Using the full sPlot dataset is also recommended if a stratification is desired that is different from the environmental factors used here, for example by geographical region or plot size.

## Code Availability  
The R code used to produce sPlotOpen from the sPlot 2.1 database is contained in the *sPlotOpen_code* GitHub repository: https://github.com/fmsabatini/sPlotOpen_Code. 
A short interactive vignette introducing to the use of sPlotOpen is in [Appendix 1](https://github.com/fmsabatini/sPlotOpen_Code/blob/master/_public/05_Demo.pdf).
This manuscript was produced using the Manubot workflow (@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128). 
The code for reproducing this manuscript is stored in the *sPlotOpen_manuscript* GitHub repository: https://github.com/fmsabatini/sPlotOpen_Manuscript.  
