## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to thousands of vegetation scientists who sampled vegetation plots in the field or digitized them into regional, national or international databases. 
We also appreciate the support of the German Research Foundation for funding sPlot as one of the iDiv (DFG FZT 118, 202548816) research platforms, as well as for funding the position of Francesco Maria Sabatini and the organization of three workshops through the sDiv calls. 
We acknowledge this support with naming the database “sPlot”, where the “s” refers to the sDiv synthesis workshops. 

The study has been supported by the TRY initiative on plant traits (http://www.try-db.org). The TRY initiative and database is hosted, developed and maintained by J. Kattge and G. Bönisch (Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry, Jena, Germany). TRY is currently supported by DIVERSITAS/Future Earth and the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig. 
Jens Kattge acknowledges support by the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry (Jena, Germany), Future Earth, the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig and the EU H2020 project BACI, Grant No 640176.


Isabelle Aubin was funded through Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry.
Yves Bergeron was funded through Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
Idoia Biurrun was funded by the Basque Government (IT936-16).
Anne Bjorkman thanks the Herschel Island-Qikiqtaruk Territorial Park management, Catherine Kennedy, Dorothy Cooley, Jill F. Johnstone, Cameron Eckert and Richard Gordon for establishing the ecological monitoring programme. Funding was provided by Herschel Island-Qikiqtaruk Territorial Park.
Luis Cayuela was supported by project BIOCON08_044 funded by Fundación BBVA.
Milan Chytrý, Flavia Landucci, Corrado Marcenò and Tomáš Peterka were supported by the Czech Science Foundation (project no. 19-28491X).
Brian Enquist thanks the following individuals and institutions for contributing data to sPlot via the SALVIAS database: Mauricio Bonifacino, Saara DeWalt, Timothy Killeen, Susan Letcher, Nigel Pitman, Cam Webb, The Missouri Botanical Garden, RAINFOR and the Amazon Forest Inventory Network.
Alvaro G. Gutiérrez was funded by Project FORECOFUN-SSA PIEF-GA-2010–274798 and FONDECYT 1200468.
Mohamed Z. Hatim thanks Kamal Shaltout and Joop Schaminée for supervision of the MSc thesis, and Joop Schaminée for support and funding from the Prince Bernard Culture Fund Prize for Nature Conservation.
Jürgen Homeier received funding from BMBF (Federal Ministry of Education and Science of Germany) and the German Research Foundation (DFG Ho3296-2, DFG Ho3296-4).
Borja Jiménez-Alfaro was funded by the Spanish Research Agency through grant AEI/10.13039/501100011033.
Dirk N. Karger received funding from: The WSL internal grant exCHELSA and ClimEx, the Joint Biodiversa COFUND project ‘FeedBaCks’ and 'Futureweb', the Swiss Data Science Projects: SPEEDMIND, and COMECO, and the Swiss National Science Foundation (20BD21_184131).
Larisa Khanina was supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (project no. AAAA-A19-119012490096-2).
Hjalmar Kühl gratefully acknowledges the Pan African team and funding by Max Planck Society and Krekeler Foundation. 
Attila Lengyel was supported by the National Research, Development and Innovation Office, Hungary (PD-123997).
Tatiana Lysenko was funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No. 16-04-00747a). 
Alireza Naqinezhad is supported by a master grant from the University of Mazandaran. 
Jérôme Munzinger was supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR) with grants INC (ANR-07-BDIV-0008), BIONEOCAL (ANR-07-BDIV-0006) & ULTRABIO (ANR-07-BDIV-0010), by National Geographic Society (Grant 7579-04), and with fundings and authorizations of North and South Provinces of New Caledonia. 
Arkadiusz Nowak received support from the National Science Centre, Poland, grant no. 2017/25/B/NZ8/00572. 
Gerhard E. Overbeck acknowledges support from Brazil’s National Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq, grant 310022/2015-0). 
Meelis Pärtel was supported by the Estonian Research Council (PRG609) and European Regional Development Fund (Centre of Excellence EcolChange)
Robert Peet acknowledges the support from the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, the North Carolina Ecosystem Enhancement Program, the U.S. Forest Service, and the U.S. National Science Foundation (DBI-9905838, DBI-0213794). 
Josep Peñuelas acknowledges the financial support from the European Research Council Synergy grant ERC-SyG-2013-610028 IMBALANCE-P.
Petr Petřík and Jiri Dolezal acknowledge the support of the long-term research development project No. RVO 67985939 of the Czech Academy of Sciences.
Oliver Phillips was funded by an ERC Advanced Grant (291585, “T-FORCES”) and a Royal Society-Wolfson Research Merit Award.
Valério D. Pillar has been supported by the Brazil’s National Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq, grant 307689/2014-0).
Solvita Rūsiņa was supported by the University of Latvia grant AAP2016/B041//Zd2016/AZ03 within the “Climate change and sustainable use of natural resources”.
Franziska Schrodt was supported by the University of Minnesota Institute on the Environment Discovery Grant, the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig grant (50170649_#7) and the University of Nottingham Anne McLaren Fellowship.
Jozef Šibík was funded by The Slovak Research and Development Agency grant nr. APVV16-0431.
Jens Christian Svenning considers this work a contribution to his VILLUM Investigator project “Biodiversity Dynamics in a Changing World” funded by VILLUM FONDEN (grant 16549).
Kim André Vanselow would like to thank W. Bernhard Dickoré for the help in the identification of plant species and acknowledges the financial support from the Volkswagen Foundation (AZ I/81 976) and the German Research Foundation (DFG VA 749/1-1, DFG VA 749/4-1).
Evan Weiher was funded by NSF DEB-0415383, UWEC-ORSP, and UWEC-BCDT.
Work by Karsten Wesche was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG WE 2601/3-1,3-2, 4-1,4-2) and by the German Ministry for Science and Education (BMBF, CAME 03G0808A).
Susan Wiser was funded by the NZ Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment’s Strategic Science Investment Fund.

This paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Ching-Feng (Woody) Li.

## Author contributions
FMS wrote the first draft of the manuscript, with considerable input from JL and HB. JL and TH wrote the resampling algorithm. FMS set up the GitHub projects, curated the database, and produced the graphs. He also coordinated the sPlot consortium. SMH wrote the Turboveg software, which holds the sPlot database. JK provided the trait data from TRY and FS performed the trait data gap filling. HB secured the funding for sPlot as a strategic project of iDiv. All other authors contributed data and/or helped set up the database and/or helped develop the resampling algorithm. All authors contributed to revising and approved the manuscript.
 
## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Biosketch
sPlot is a collaborative initiative to integrate existing local and national vegetation-plot datasets into a global harmonized database. 
It was initiated in 2013, within the sDiv working group "Plant trait-environment relationships across the world’s biomes". 
Since then, it became established as the largest vegetation-plot databases worldwide and coordinates a consortium of 251 individual active members, representing 167 local and national datasets. 
sPlot's overarching scientific goal is the exploration of all aspects of global plant community diversity, including taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity, across biomes, vegetation types, taxonomic or functional guilds and scales. 
Central to sPlot’s mission are the exploration of the relationships between environmental drivers, trait variation, and assembly processes in local plant communities worldwide. 
